the spraying process there are different
methods of spray painting for different
types of applications conventional
low-pressure compressed air spray
painting is typically used for all grip
top coats and low viscosity primers this
gives an extensive overspray bounce in
cavities corners and high sound levels
airless spray painting is a high
pressure application typically used for
high viscosity primers
this carries a risk of injection
injuries and static electricity which
could cause a spark air assisted air a
spray painting is for example used when
applying finishing primers this
application method uses less aerosol and
overspray than conventional methods
though again carries the risk of
injection injuries pressure pots use
with spraying equipment are accompanied
by various risks there are an awkward
manual handling hazard for the spraying
team and they can be subject to over
pressurization the mixing pouring and
reducing of paint should always be
carried out in a well-ventilated area
there are a few factors to consider
appropriate protective equipment should
be worn all spills and splashes should
be cleaned up immediately and if any of
the materials being handled are splashed
onto parts of the body then the skin
should be cleaned immediately with soap
and water you should never use paint
reducers to clean areas of the body as
they can be absorbed by the skin
any contaminated clothing should be
removed unchanged at the earliest
opportunity unused materials should be
returned to their original containers
you should never mix materials together
empty cans should be removed to a
suitable place and allowed to dry before
being disposed of in accordance with
local regulator
any to pack materials allowed to pot
before disposal should be isolated due
to the potential for an exothermic or
heat generating reaction paint and
associated materials should be stored in
accordance with the relevant local
legislation but as a general rule the
following guidelines should be applied
flammable materials should be stored in
tightly closed clearly labeled
containers lids should be replaced after
use large solid containers should be
earth during liquid transfer operations
and paint should not be stored in the
spray area it is vital that all
equipment is regularly inspected and
maintained in good working order hoses
should be regularly checked for leaks
you should use appropriate materials to
capture drips or overspray absorbent
materials such as paper or sawdust
should not be used as they'll increase
the risk of fire or explosion all use
cleaning rags and similar materials
should be placed in metal containers
with closed fitting lids and if
practical dampened with water all waste
material should be disposed of in
accordance with local regulations spray
guns must never be directed towards
other workers to ensure that they are
not exposed to the spray of hazardous
materials all the risk of injection
injury it's important to control the
mist of the spray to minimize the risk
of exposure to those around you when
spraying in a booth the object being
sprayed should always be between the
sprayer and the exhaust air outlet
extraction of the booth should be
checked prior to application and the
airflow at the point of application
should meet national requirements the
equipment must also be maintained
regularly
when spraying in the open air there are
a few points to remember if possible you
should use protective sheeting or
screens to stop the spray mist traveling
you should mark out an exclusion zone
with cones and tape and warning signs
should be put up this zone should only
be entered by the application team and
all other staff should be kept up wind
of the spraying spraying in high winds
should be avoided there are a number of
factors to consider when entering
confined spaces you should assess
whether the atmosphere contains or will
contain sufficient oxygen during the
whole process so that normal respiratory
functions can be maintained if solvent
vapors force air out of a confined space
then the atmospheres oxygen levels may
drop to dangerous levels the solvent
vapor level should be controlled below
the exposure limit this can be done by
ventilation or extraction of the
confined space
signs should be displayed outside the
confined area to indicate that spraying
is in progress in order to protect you a
full face mask and a second disposable
overall are strongly recommended the
extraction of a spray booth should be
checked prior to application commencing
and the airflow and the point of
application should meet national
requirements work should be carried out
away from entry doors and these should
carry a sign or indication that
sprayings in progress if possible you
should avoid standing or spraying into
the air flow you should also aim to
minimize the time spent in a position
between the object and the direction of
the airflow or extraction and
ventilation equipment should be
maintained according to the suppliers or
installers instructions when work is
taking place in the workshop it should
be carried out away from entry doors or
other facilities entry doors should
carry a sigh or some indication of
spraying in progress if possible objects
should be sprayed on a turntable or a
device that allows easy maneuvering
there are a number of simple points to
consider when spraying before spraying
you should read and follow the health
and safety instructions provided put on
all PPE including a respirator before
entering the spray area where an overall
with full length sleeves plagues and the
hood
the buttons and zips fully fastened wear
long-sleeved gloves and boots make sure
there are no gaps or exposed skin at
your wrists and ankles and wear a full
face mask or half face mask with God's
during spraying it's important to keep
everyone out of the area except the
application team and to prevent or
control exposure to mists and vapors as
far as practicable you should never
remove any PPE even for a short period
of time
remove your face mask in the booth wait
at least 10 minutes or until the vapor
is cleared before removing your
respirator or wait until early asthma
symptoms occur by then it's too late
after spraying you should clean down any
overspray remove your PPE starting from
the outer layer wash before eating
drinking or smoking shower before going
home or as soon as possible if you've
been in contact with paint wash your
face mask and inside your helmet every
day replace your gloves as soon as the
inside looks dirty and store PPE
outside the spray area when it's not in
use at any time do not allow paint or
dry spray to come into contact with your
skin
allow rubbish to build up in the work
area or allow horseplay in the work area
all clean spray guns in an open work